The blueprints are drafted, the workers are set.
It's time to build his church.
Our knees need to hit the ground in prayer before a shovel does.
Our hands need to be raised in worship before they swing a hand.
Let this church be more than a fellowship, more than a building.
Let this church be a house of gold.
Amen, amen.
Once again, thanks for being here.
If you are a guest today, help us get to know you at Encounter Church.
That's one of our hearts desire is that we can walk side by side with one another.
In fact, we say it all the time at Encounter Church, nobody walks alone, but we can only walk with you if we know you.
So help us get to know you, catch me in the lobby, introduce yourself.
I would greatly appreciate that.
And those that are watching
online help us get to know you as well.
I know not always will we see you in person but we can certainly get to know you virtually so do me a favor get your information on the screen reach out to us help us connect with you as well.
All right well we are right in the middle smack dab in the middle of a series that we've been in for three weeks now and we have two more weeks to go a series that we're simply calling a house
of prayer as I was preparing for this year and I was last fall I was sitting in my office and I was praying and I was contemplating I was researching and I was getting everything squared away for the year.
I really felt that the theme for the year and as we've already talked about is build his church.
Now, we are going to physically, in just a couple of months, stick a backhoe in the ground and we're going to begin to construct an incredible building for the cause of Christ.
But if we don't do anything on the inside, then all we're doing is building a building.
Truth be told, if we don't build inside, if we don't let God do the work in our lives and
in the lives of the body of believers, then nothing that we do on this building will make an impact for the cause of Christ.
However, if we will begin to do the work on the inside, come on, that's one of our missions, right?
Love, reach, empower, that reach portion is we reach up to heaven personally, we reach in and we do the work on the inside.
That's not always the part that we like.
Come on, how many of you love it when somebody points out something you've done wrong?
No, not a single person in this room.
I mean, somebody walks up and goes, man, you didn't do this, right?
I'd be like, come on.
Right?
Square up.
Let's go.
We don't like him if somebody points out wrong.
But sometimes, okay, many times in our spiritual lives, there are things that are going on.
There are things that we need to allow God to not only surface in us, but give us the boldness to deal with.
And the only way that we can truly hear the heart of God, the only way that we can truly come to the place that we understand what He has for us and what needs to happen in our lives is to truly become a house of prayer.
I'm not just talking about the body of believers as a whole.
Oh, we can easily say that encountered church values prayer.
I mean, it's one of our core values.
We value prayer, not mere chatter.
We dedicate a service every week.
To prayer, we kick off the year every year with 21 days of prayer and fasting.
We could say, and we could build a case for the fact that encounter church is a house of prayer.
However, if all it is is information on a page, writing on prints on the walls, if all it is is details on the website,
But it's not happening on the inside that it's nothing more than words.
I believe that God has called us as a people to not just say we believe in prayer, but to be a people of prayer.
Over the last couple of weeks, we've looked at a couple topics that really I think are vitally important questions for us to ask.
Number one is, do I have to pray?
Do you remember that?
That was week one.
We process through the fact that really that's probably not the best question.
The best question is probably why wouldn't we pray when the opportunity is being given to us?
You see, when Jesus died on the cross, the Bible says that the veil was torn from the top to the bottom, giving us entry in to the very presence of God.
Again, we no longer need a third party to petition heaven for us.
We can now boldly, as we've read in the Word of God, boldly come into the throne room of God.
I want you to know church, that's good news.
Let me say it to this side, because this side got excited.
This side was a little quiet.
I want you to know today that that's good news.
We don't have to, you still weren't very excited with that.
I'm gonna give them one more chance.
Let's give them one more chance.
I believe this morning that that's good news.
Hey, come on now.
You guys are on the ball that caffeine's starting to kick in is working through the veins.
But when we give it to God, when we truly personally come into the throne room of God, it gives us an opportunity, an opportunity to know the very heart of God.
You see, sometimes we,
We don't go to God because we're afraid of what he'll say.
We're afraid that his way is not our way.
Can I just tell you straight up, his way's not your way?
His way is far beyond your way.
His thoughts are beyond anything you could ever imagine in your mind.
God holds in His hand the solution to everything in life.
And all that He desires is that we, His people will boldly come into His presence.
We'll step before Him.
We'll petition Him.
We'll lay that care, that concern, that anxiety at His feet.
He's kind of like our dad.
He's there ready to lift us up.
I know, here's the deal.
When my kids were little,
If they walked up with those little kid eyes and they're like, Daddy, man, you better believe that this guy would pick up his child and not hold and I'd love.
That's what God wants to do for us.
He wants us to boldly come into his throne room, to step into his presence.
So do I have to pray?
Well, in theory, no, but why wouldn't you?
I don't have to eat either, but it's a good thing that I eat, right?
I share with you last week, this is pretty profound.
I don't need a parachute to jump out of an airplane, but it helps.
Our conversation with God strengthens our relationship with Him.
It gives us a confidence in Him.
It releases that level of trust.
It strengthens our relationship.
Why?
Because suddenly, I'm able to share my heart with him.
I no longer am I bottling those things in, but I'm giving them to God and in return as I listen to him, because what we've discovered is prayer is as much listening as it is speaking.
Right?
Sometimes we're guilty of doing all the work,
But God says, sometimes I just want you to be still.
Just be still and listen.
So do I have to pray?
Well, not necessarily, but it's a good thing if you do.
The second thing that we've talked about is how do I pray?
We look last week of what it looks like to talk to God.
What's that look like in our personal lives and how do we accomplish that task?
Now these questions are often the questions that keep us from truly living a life a prayer, but there's another question that sometimes
trips us up and we'll kind of bypass it.
We have a plan of action and I'll talk about what we try to do in just a few moments.
But here's another downfall and the question is this, how do I pray for and with others?
Sometimes we're afraid to pray for others.
Have you ever had one of those moments when someone says, hey, will you pray for me?
And really you don't know their name, but you're supposed to know their name?
And you're afraid that if you ask what their name is, now they're gonna be offended that you don't remember who they are.
And you're like, I don't even know how to pray.
So you're like, Lord, I pray that you'll just bless my friend.
Bless this person that I'm praying.
Yeah, so we kind of push back from the prayer.
I wanna challenge you today, embrace that conversation with God.
But this particular question is a tough question because there's a lot of layers
So I want to begin to peel them back today.
You see, many times if we do pray with people, we're hindering, we're pushing back because truth is told we'd rather pray alone.
Why?
Because we feel safer.
When we pray for somebody else, what happens if I stumble on my words?
What happens if I pray too loudly?
What happens if I don't pray loud enough?
I don't know that I've got all the fancy words to say.
But praying with somebody can sometimes be intimidating, but I believe that we look at it from the wrong perspective.
Here's the deal.
When we pray, when we're praying for somebody else, when we're praying individually, when we're just crying out to God, here's what I want you to understand.
God's not grading your prayer.
He doesn't listen to your prayer and go, I'm gonna give you a C minus today.
I might meet that need.
That's not how God works.
Praying for others is not a performance, it's not a moment to shine, it's not a moment for us to make ourselves look good, but it's an opportunity to partner together with somebody else, to walk side by side with them, to gather together the need that they have and be that support.
We say it all the time at an encounter church, nobody walks alone.
What greater way to walk with somebody else, but then in a moment of prayer.
It's partnering together with other believers.
It's a moment of inviting God into the midst of our issues and our concerns.
This morning we're gonna have two texts.
It's a little odd and untraditional to have two texts, but I wanna give those to you today.
Number one says this.
Praying the spirit at all times and on every occasion, stay alert and be persistent in your prayer for all believers
everywhere.
Now why do I want another text?
Because sometimes we can read scriptures like this and we think, well the Bible says that I just have to pray for other people in church.
Here's the problem with that mentality.
Sometimes as a church it's easy to become self-absorbed into our form and no more.
Come on.
We're concerned about the person that sits down the row from us.
We're concerned about the person that sits in the same area as us.
But beyond that, that's where our level of concern stops.
Well, look where the Bible says.
First Timothy chapter two, I urge you.
Come on, say I urge you.
Why does he say that?
Because it's vitally important, some translations say, so I encourage you, it's vital that some even say, I beseech thee.
If you've been here very long, you know that's one of my favorite biblical words, and we don't use it at all in vocabulary, but it's a great word.
I beseech you, great, great word.
He says, I urge you first of all to pray for, here it is, all people.
Come on.
What about pastel capacitor?
What about that person that I just don't like?
Do I have to pray for them?
Yes.
What about that person at work that's a real jerk?
Come on, anybody work with a jerk, don't raise your hand.
This is being filmed.
Do we have to pray for them?
Absolutely.
What about that person that's done you wrong over and over and over and over and over and over and over and over again?
Yes.
We got to pray for all people everywhere.
Look what it says.
I urge you.
It's vital.
I encourage you, first of all, to pray for all people.
Ask God to help them.
Okay, when we ask God to help them, that's not the same thing as saying God get them.
That's not praying for them.
We say, God, would you just speak into their lives?
Lord, I know that sometimes at work they can just really be annoying, they can really be a jerk.
But God, I know that there's a deeper cause.
God, I don't know what their life is like on a personal level.
God, I don't know what they're facing with their relationships with their finances.
But Lord, I pray that you'll just intervene right where they are.
Let them know that you love them.
See, the Bible says that God loves everyone, that he desires that none would perish, but all would come to that place in that moment of repentance.
So you begin to call their name out in prayer.
Ask God to help them and intercede on their behalf.
We're gonna talk about that word in just a moment.
It's kind of a churchy word.
Intercede on their behalf and give thanks for them.
If we're truly gonna become a house of prayer, then prayer cannot stay privates.
That's hard because some of us in the house, man, we would much rather just
kind of go in the corner and pray privately with ourselves.
Well, what happens when you're in the middle of Walmart and you find that person, you're talking to that individual, you haven't seen in a while and you say, how's it going?
And they actually tell you the truth.
Come on, most of you, your answer is, hey, how's it going?
It's fine.
Affair to Midland.
If you were kind of Southern Missouri guy.
But what happens if they really begin to tell you the truth and they begin to share the difficulty?
What happens if they say, man, life's not good?
What do you do then?
See, our greatest response should be pausing and saying, you know what?
Can I pray for you?
Can I just take a moment and can we agree together and have a conversation with God?
We're gonna dive into this this morning.
But I want you to understand the reality is that prayer cannot just be private.
There's moments that it's got to be public.
Let's look at five truths of public prayer.
Take really good notes this morning.
Number one is this, praying for others is about agreements, not eloquence.
Now I feel like some of this on eloquence, I've talked about even a little bit each and every week, but I'm doing that purposely because sometimes we need to hear things more than once for it to really sink in.
And some of us are afraid to pray because we're not sure that we have all the right words.
Have you been there before?
Have you ever had somebody ask you to pray and suddenly you thought, I don't know how to do this.
What are they going to think about my prayer skills?
What if I say something that's wrong?
Suddenly before we even begin, we discount ourselves, we excuse our way out by saying nothing and delaying it by simply saying this to them.
Well, I'll tell you what, I'll pray for you.
And then lo and behold, three weeks go by and we haven't prayed for them at all.
But we got out of the situation in the moment by giving that spiritual catchphrase, I'll pray for you.
What would happen if in boldness, encourage, you just took them by the hands in that moment, maybe you're in the middle of Walmart, maybe you're in the middle of the Toy section or the Pharmacy or the Grocery section of Walmart and they're pouring out their heart to you or they're just saying life really stinks right now.
What if you paused in the middle of Walmart and said, let's pray?
What would that look like?
I believe God would honor that.
I believe he would honor that moment of truly praying one for another.
What did Paul say?
Or what did he say in 1st Timothy?
We just read it.
I urge you, first of all, to pray for all people.
Ask God to help them.
What if you simply said, let me pray for you, and then you actually do that?
Matthew chapter 18 says it this way.
I also tell you this, if two of you agree here on earth concerning anything you ask, my father in heaven will do it for you.
For a two or three gather together as my followers, I am there among them.
I love what Jesus is saying here.
He truly takes the pressure off us and he places it on God.
He takes a moment to emphasize not the idea of an impressive vocabulary or even a deep level of theology, but a moment of agreements.
Did you see what it said in verse 20?
Where two or three gathered together as my
followers, some translations say in my name.
What does that mean?
Well, I want to take a prayer real quick, and let's back up to the very end of a prayer.
If we were to pray in this moment, we would have our conversation with God, and then when we end it with a four-letter word, starting with A, it would be amen.
Right?
What is the word amen mean?
It literally
serves as the solemn affirmation of agreements with one another to God.
It's not some fancy word of signing off or saying goodbye, but it's literally saying together, we agree on this, let it be, let it happen, or so be it.
It's a moment of coming together in a unified purpose
of faith.
It's believing together that God is not only who he claims to be, but he will do what he said he will do.
Let me say that again.
It's not just saying, God, we believe you are who you say you are.
It's saying, God, I believe that you will do what you said you will do.
So when we come together as his followers or in his name,
We're standing together as a unified powerhouse, a prayer, not because of who we are, but because of who He is.
It's not that the two of us or the three of us or the four of us gather together.
And because, hey, we have a powerhouse team here that's praying that has nothing to do with it, but it's because we petition God, the creator of the world, the one who spoke life into existence.
We're saying, Lord, here we are.
We're gathered together in a moment of faith
we share the burdens, we release it to God, and we acknowledge that only He can meet the need.
Now remember when Jesus was asked about prayer, He said, pray like this, our Father, who is in heaven, may your name be holy.
In this moment, it's in agreement together, it's declaring
in a unified voice, God, you are holy, we acknowledge you, let it be as we have stated, we trust you.
What a powerful declaration.
Now understand that this stance of trust doesn't, it doesn't give me what I want, but it says, Lord, I trust you with your plan.
That's huge.
You see, because sometimes
Sometimes we call out to God.
I talked about it last week.
It's almost like we, in our mind, we envision that He's some sort of Jesus in a genie bottle.
That if I rub my Bible, I wipe the dust off and suddenly Jesus comes out and I've got three wishes.
But that's not how God works.
Jesus isn't a genie in a bottle, but He's a savior that loves us.
He loves us as we are, but he loves us too much for us to stay where we are.
So we begin to lay those needs out and we begin to give it to him and God will meet that need as we trust him in the process.
So here's the good news.
When you pray with somebody, you don't have to display your biblical knowledge or lack thereof.
You don't have to
Fix their issues or counsel them.
That's one of the biggest things that we talk to our prayer team about is when somebody comes up for prayer, this is not a counseling moment.
They may say here, here's what's happening in my family and my relationships.
Your job is not to fix the moment as it to say, God, I know you need my help.
But your job is to say, God, here we come.
We don't understand what's happening, but we trust you.
We trust you in this moment.
Sometimes the most powerful prayers aren't deep and lengthy.
They're raw and honest.
So we say, God, we don't know what to do.
Lord, this doesn't make any sense to us, but we need your help.
See, what God is looking for in your prayer is simple obedience.
He just wants you to step out in faith
in agreement one with another.
Giving it to him.
The second truth is this.
Praying for others is an opportunity to share the weights.
Come on.
Praying for others is an opportunity to share the weight.
It literally is carrying out the culture that we've set as a church.
at encountered church, no one walks alone.
This is sharing the weight with one another.
Have you ever been trying to carry something on your own that really you shouldn't have carried by yourself?
Being it's too heavy or maybe it's too large to deal with on your own sure.
We've all been to the problem is too often rather than reaching out for somebody, we push ourselves beyond the breaking points.
Well, the Bible tells us in Galatians chapter six, it says, share each other's burdens.
Okay, let me pause.
Why is it that when our kids are little, when they're toddlers, and they're learning what it means to function in a society with people, and they're saying this magical word, mine, mine, mine,
and they're grabbing things and they're holding onto it, and we always say this to them, no, no, no, no, no, share, right?
Share.
And we encourage our kids to share, but when it's a situation in our personal lives, we'd rather bottle up, bottle up, mine, mine.
I believe that here, God is telling us, we've got to share with one.
Now, I'm not saying you got to air your dirty laundry.
I'm not saying when someone walks up and goes, how's it going?
Well, let me just tell you, starting at the age of four,
And we begin to lay out a laundry list of every mistake we've ever, no, I don't think that's what he's talking about.
He's saying that in those moments when we feel the pressures of life, have that community, have that connection with those around you that you begin to share that burden one with another.
Look at this, share each other's burdens and in this way obey the law of Christ.
If you think you are too important to help someone, you are only fooling yourselves.
You're not that important.
Now some of you are like, well, Pastor, how could you say that?
I didn't.
The Bible did.
If you think that you're so important that you don't have time to pray for somebody, you need to do a self-evaluation.
You need to do what once over in your life.
Why?
There's a hard issue going on.
See, there are two things in this scripture I want us to see.
Number one is we were never called to be a silo Christian.
In other words, standing on our own, trying to contain everything by ourselves.
We're not designed to be in a field all alone, a structure that's solid, but full of everything by itself.
No, no, no.
We were created for community.
In the very, very beginning when God created Adam, it wasn't very long that he looked at Adam and said, what?
It's not good that man should be alone.
The New Testament says, don't forsake this moment of gathering together as believers.
We just read the scripture that were to share our burdens with one another.
We were created for community.
We need this connection one with another.
You need the person across the room and they need you equally as well.
The second I talked about just a moment ago, if you've somehow promoted yourself
beyond the point of praying for somebody.
I would encourage you today, step off that self-appointed throne, humble yourself and come back to God.
Allow God to use you in a real way today.
You see, when we pray with somebody else, when we invite them into our moment, we're simply saying, I can't do this by myself.
But understand this.
You may not and they may not want to share all the details and that's okay.
You don't have to have all the details to pray.
Did you know that?
God already knows everything about your life.
He knows everything about their life.
You don't have to have every detail.
You don't necessarily even need the name of the person that you're praying for.
God knows.
All we've got to do is come to Him, call out to Him.
We're simply saying, God, I know that this is a situation.
Lord, you know the need.
You know what needs to be done.
We ask you right now to step in and do what you do best.
Lord, meet them right where they are.
Number three, praying for others meets standing in the gap.
Standing in the gap.
What we're talking about here is when we come before God to pray, we're simply interceding to Him.
Here's what that word means.
Intercession is praying on behalf of others, acting as a go-between or an advocate to plead with God for their needs, mercy and guidance.
It's saying, Lord, I'm gonna stand in the gap for them.
They may not have the strength that they need.
Have you ever been in the middle of a moment and you didn't even have the strength to pray for yourself?
See, that's where we step in.
as we walk side by side with one another.
We bridge that gap, we stand as that intercessor, petitioning heaven one for another.
What a great opportunity to be an advocate for each other.
We should never be, see their burden, we should never see their situation as a heavy load, but as an opportunity to walk side by side with a fellow believer.
First Timothy chapter two says it this way,
I urge you, first of all, we've read this earlier, pray for all people, ask God to help them, intercede on their behalf.
There it is.
We're standing in the gap for them.
In essence, we're simply praying, God, I bring their need to you.
Lord, they may not even have the strength that they need to pray for themselves.
But Lord, here I am.
I'm standing in the gap for them.
When we pray for those around us, it's not that we're creating this moment to gain information so that we can gossip.
It's wholeheartedly trusting God, not attempting to control the outcome, but allowing the Holy Spirit to lead in the process.
We're gonna talk more about the leading of the Holy Spirit on week five of this series.
So just hang tight on that.
When you pray for others, don't feel that you have to have it all figured out.
Give the Holy Spirit the open door.
Give the Holy Spirit opportunity.
Romans chapter 12 simply says, offer yourselves as a living sacrifice.
So we make ourselves available to the purpose of interceding or standing in the gap for those around us.
Truth number four, if words fail you, the word never will.
If words fail you, the word never will.
Now, I know I use a little play on words here, but what I'm getting at is never forget the power of the word of God.
The Bible simply says this, for the word of God is alive and powerful.
Come on, say it's powerful.
It's sharper than the sharpest two-edged sword, cutting between soul and spirit, between joint and marrow.
It exposes our innermost thoughts and desires.
But why is it that we have been given the most powerful, offensive, and defensive weapon possible?
Yet for some reason or another, we leave it on the shelf time and time and time again.
Listen carefully, when you spend time applying the word of God to your prayer, to your intercession,
We are taking a moment to align our hearts with the heart and the will of God.
We listen to God.
We absorb his heart, his desires.
We utilize the word of God.
It removes the pressure from us of having to have the right words and giving it to God.
It removes the pressure of us having to have it all figured out and it lays a put on God's shoulder.
Second Corinthians says it this way.
For all of God's promises, say all, for all of God's promises have been fulfilled in Christ Jesus with a resounding yes.
And through Christ, our amen, which means yes, we talked about that a moment ago, so be it, let it be done, a sin to God for His glory.
God's word never fails.
But I hear some of you will pastor.
I don't really know God's word.
You want to hear the easy solution?
Get to know it.
How do you get to know it?
You spend time in the Word of God.
Well, pastor, I'm not a great reader.
That's okay.
There are apps out there that will read it to you.
There's a lot of times that when I'm doing my morning reading,
I'll open up the U version app and I'll go to my reading plan and I'll hit play and while it's reading it to me, I'll read along because now not only am I hearing it, but I'm seeing it, right?
There are all sorts of excuses of reasons why we don't know, but there's a great reason why you should know.
There's power in the Word of God.
This is the greatest weapon
for your offense or your defense.
Number five, very quickly this morning, praying for others will strengthen and build his church.
I'm convinced that nothing will strengthen a relationship more than spending time praying one for another.
Let me say that again, you need to let that sink in today.
I'm convinced that nothing will strengthen a relationship, whether it's husband and wife or boyfriend, girlfriend, or if it's just friend and friend, nothing will strengthen a relationship more than spending time praying for one another.
Because suddenly, you begin to see their life and situation through a different set of lenses.
You find yourself allowing the heart of God to be the filter that everything goes through.
Can I be honest?
That's a much greater filter than our own heart.
Why?
Because our own heart brings up the past.
Our own heart applies judgment or opinion or memories or experiences too often.
This leaves us falling short.
It leaves us failing to fulfill
our godly example and representation of Jesus to those around us.
Remember, we are called to be Christ ambassadors, to reflect him to the best of our ability to the world around us.
James says it this way, confess your sins to each other and pray for each other so that you may be healed.
Come on, confess your sins.
Sometimes we're afraid to do that.
Why?
Because we're afraid that if we share with them that we've got mistakes in our lives, they're going to think less of us.
But what if we partner together?
What if we walk side by side, encouraging?
Go on in verse Thessalonians and says, so encourage each other and build each other up, just as you were already doing.
So we're confessing, we're sharing our heart, we're sharing our burdens.
We're now encouraging one another.
We're praying for not just those in this room, but everyone everywhere.
We're truly becoming the intercessor that God desires us to be.
If we truly want to build his church, we must learn to be a people of prayer.
Why did I say learn?
Because it's not natural.
Right?
It's natural to be self-absorbed.
It's natural to be concerned about me and nobody else.
But God tells us to begin to look at those around you.
Don't be so interested in yourself that you forget about the person next to you.
We've been called to walk side by some, not with fancy eloquent words, but with a heart of obedience, with the desire to fulfill the call of God.
I believe that God's called us to be a house of prayer.
That's right.
What I pray right now for every person in this room would speak to us right now, challenge our hearts in a real
But if there are those of us in the house that are struggling, what I pray that you will show up.
But if there are those of us that are having a difficult time praying for somebody outside of our little circle, Lord, give us boldness and courage.
Lord, help us to understand that we can bold this step into your throne.
God, that you have a planned purpose within me.